Alternative CNI How-to (#900)
canonical/k8s-snap: docs/src/snap/howto/networking/alternative-cni.md

# How to use an alternative CNI

> While {{product}} ships with a default CNI that we guarantee is compatible with

Reviewer: +1

our distribution, you may want to use a different CNI plugin for your specific
networking requirements. This guide explains how to safely replace the default
CNI with an alternative solution.

## What you'll need

This guide assumes the following:

- You have root or sudo access to the machine.
- Basic understanding of Kubernetes networking concepts.
- Basic knowledge of Helm.

## Disable default network implementation

For an existing cluster, disable the default network
plugin:

```
sudo k8s disable ingress gateway network
```

For a new cluster, create a bootstrap configuration that disables networking:

```
cat <<EOF > bootstrap-config.yaml
cluster-config:
  network:
    enabled: false
```

Then bootstrap the cluster with this configuration:

```
sudo k8s bootstrap --file bootstrap-config.yaml
```

## Configure Helm repository

Add the CNI's Helm repository to {{product}}'s Helm installation. This guide
uses Calico as an example:

```
sudo k8s helm repo add projectcalico https://docs.tigera.io/calico/charts
```

> ## Install Calico CNI

Reviewer: The title of the guide implies that this is a generic guide but with calico as an example. I would consider changing the title to reflect this - "Install alternative CNI"

> Create a values file with the basic configuration:

Reviewer: Is this values file needed for other CNIs?
If so please ignore. 
If not, I would specify this is unique to the Calico example we are providing and add here "..basic configuration for Calico"

Reviewer 2: I would assume that any alternative CNI's will also need a custom values configuration for the helm chart.

> # How to use an alternative CNI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# How-to use an alternative CNI
```
Do we need a dash?

While {{product}} ships with a default [Container Network Interface] (CNI) that

> we guarantee is compatible with our distribution, you may want to use a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
guarantees compatibility with our distribution, there is an option to use a
```

Author: I'll keep "we guarantee [...]" but will change "you may want" -> "It's possible"

> different CNI plugin for your specific networking requirements. This guide

Reviewer 2: Can you include a link to an upstream page that lists supported alternative CNIs?

Author: I can't find an upstream page that lists CNI's

Reviewer 2: Fair enough, I'm not sure if it would be smart to link to a competitor? https://ranchermanager.docs.rancher.com/faq/container-network-interface-providers
What are your thoughts @nhennigan?

explains how to safely replace the default CNI with an alternative solution.

> ## What you'll need

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Prerequisites
```

This guide assumes the following:

> - You have root or sudo access to the machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Root or sudo access to the machine.
```

> - Basic understanding of Kubernetes networking concepts.

Reviewer 2: Let's link the networking explanation page.

Author: No such page

Reviewer 2: How about: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/compute-storage-net/network-plugins/

Author: That page doesn't provide useful information for the content of the tutorial. I think i'd rather leave this without a link.

Reviewer: I think if someone is looking to replace a CNI they already have some idea of networking in K8s and where to find this info so I think we can leave this link if you don't want to include it Etienne.

- Basic knowledge of Helm.

## Disable default network implementation

For an existing cluster, disable the default network
plugin:

```

> sudo k8s disable ingress gateway network

Reviewer 2: Should we add a note that the underlying implementation ships all three features and you can't just disable one?

```

For a new cluster, create a bootstrap configuration that disables networking:

```
cat <<EOF > bootstrap-config.yaml
cluster-config:
  network:
    enabled: false
```

> Then bootstrap the cluster with this configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, bootstrap the cluster with this configuration:
```

```
sudo k8s bootstrap --file bootstrap-config.yaml
```

## Configure Helm repository

> Add the CNI's Helm repository to {{product}}'s Helm installation. This guide
> uses Calico as an example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add the CNI's Helm repository to {{product}}'s Helm installation. This guide
illustrates switching the network to Calico:
```

> uses Calico as an example:

Reviewer 2: Let's add a link to Calico's docs please.

```
sudo k8s helm repo add projectcalico https://docs.tigera.io/calico/charts
```

## Install Alternative CNI

Create a values file with the basic configuration for Calico:

```
cat <<EOF > values.yaml
apiServer:
  enabled: false
calicoctl:
  image: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap/calico/ctl
  tag: v3.28.0
installation:
  calicoNetwork:
    ipPools:
    - cidr: 10.1.0.0/16
      encapsulation: VXLAN
      name: ipv4-ippool
  registry: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap
serviceCIDRs:
- 10.152.183.0/24
tigeraOperator:
  image: tigera/operator
  registry: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap
  version: v1.34.0
EOF
```

> Once you've created the values file, create the required namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After saving the values file, create the required namespace:
```

```
sudo k8s kubectl create namespace tigera-operator
```

Deploy Calico using Helm:

```
sudo k8s helm install calico projectcalico/tigera-operator --version v3.28.0 -f values.yaml --namespace tigera-operator
```

## Verify deployment

> Monitor the pod status:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Monitor the status of the calico pods:
```

```
watch sudo k8s kubectl get pods -n calico-system
```

> You should see output similar to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If Calico is deployed successfully, the output will be similar to:
```

```
NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
calico-kube-controllers-7bc846689c-9p2kp   1/1     Running   0          22h
calico-node-2bm8m                          1/1     Running   0          22h
calico-typha-56f55cb75-cj2jk               1/1     Running   0          22h
csi-node-driver-vth9t                      2/2     Running   0          22h
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I would recommend adding a note that users do not get support for an alternative CNI and the responsibility is entirely on them.

In addition, I would add a note that at any time a switch to the networking solution provided by Canonical can be made by running: ` sudo k8s enable ingress gateway network`

Author: Thanks, I added a section on reverting

> # How to use an alternative CNI

Reviewer 2: I think we need to capitalize more words in the headers and sub headers.

While {{product}} ships with a default [Container Network Interface] (CNI) that

> we guarantee is compatible with our distribution, it's possible to use a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
guarantees compatibility with our distribution, it's possible to use a
```

different CNI plugin for your specific networking requirements. This guide
explains how to safely replace the default CNI with an alternative solution.

## Prerequisites

This guide assumes the following:

- Root or sudo access to the machine.
- Basic understanding of Kubernetes networking concepts.

> - Basic knowledge of Helm.

Reviewer 2: Let's link to Helm please.

serviceCIDRs:
- 10.152.183.0/24
tigeraOperator:
  image: tigera/operator
  registry: ghcr.io/canonical/k8s-snap
  version: v1.34.0
EOF
```

After saving the values file, create the required namespace:

```
sudo k8s kubectl create namespace tigera-operator
```

Deploy Calico using Helm:

```
sudo k8s helm install calico projectcalico/tigera-operator --version v3.28.0 -f values.yaml --namespace tigera-operator
```

## Verify deployment

Monitor the status of the calico pods:

```
watch sudo k8s kubectl get pods -n calico-system
```

If Calico is deployed successfully, the output will be similar to:

```
NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
calico-kube-controllers-7bc846689c-9p2kp   1/1     Running   0          22h
calico-node-2bm8m                          1/1     Running   0          22h
calico-typha-56f55cb75-cj2jk               1/1     Running   0          22h
csi-node-driver-vth9t                      2/2     Running   0          22h
```

## Reverting

If the deployment does not work as expected, you can always revert to the
default networking configuration.

```
sudo k8s helm uninstall calico --namespace tigera-operator
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Remove the alternative CNI's namespace:

```

```
sudo k8s kubectl delete namespace tigera-operator
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Enable the default networking features:

```

# How to use an alternative CNI

While {{product}} ships with a default [Container Network Interface] (CNI) that
we ensure is fully compatible with our distribution, it's possible to use a
different CNI plugin for your specific networking requirements. This guide
explains how to safely replace the default CNI with an alternative solution.

## Prerequisites

This guide assumes the following:

- Root or sudo access to the machine.
- Basic understanding of Kubernetes networking concepts.
- Basic knowledge of [Helm].

## Disable default network implementation

For an existing cluster, disable the default network
plugin:

```
sudo k8s disable ingress gateway network
```

For a new cluster, create a bootstrap configuration that disables networking:

```
cat <<EOF > bootstrap-config.yaml
cluster-config:
  network:

>     enabled: false

Reviewer 2: We're missing the closing EOF here.

Author: thanks!

```

Then, bootstrap the cluster with this configuration:

```
sudo k8s bootstrap --file bootstrap-config.yaml
```

## Configure Helm repository

Add the CNI's Helm repository to {{product}}'s Helm installation. This guide
uses [Calico] as an example:

```
sudo k8s helm repo add projectcalico https://docs.tigera.io/calico/charts
```

> ## Install Alternative CNI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Install alternative CNI
```
Let's be consistent with the capitalization. If the header is lower case we should be here as well.
